Learning Data Manipulation for Augmentation and Weighting
Abstract
Manipulating data, such as weighting data examples or augmenting with new instances, has
been increasingly used to improve model training. Previous work has studied various rule- or
learning-based approaches designed for specific types of data manipulation. In this work, we
propose a new method that supports learning different manipulation schemes with the same
gradient-based algorithm. Our approach builds upon a recent connection of supervised learning and reinforcement learning (RL), and adapts an off-the-shelf reward learning algorithm from
RL for joint data manipulation learning and model training. Different parameterization of the
“reward” function instantiates different manipulation schemes. We showcase data augmentation
that learns a text transformation network, and data weighting that dynamically adapts the data
sample importance. Experiments show the resulting algorithms significantly improve the image
and text classification performance in low data regime and class-imbalance problems.
1 Introduction
Performance of most present machine learning systems has crucially depended on the amount and
quality of the data used for training. It has become increasingly ubiquitous to manipulate data for
improved learning, especially in low data regime or in presence of low-quality datasets (e.g., imbalanced labels). For example, data augmentation applies label-preserving transformations on original
data points to expand the data size; data weighting assigns an importance weight to each instance to
adapt its effect on learning; and data synthesis generates entire artificial examples. Different types
of manipulation can be suitable for different application settings.
Common data manipulation methods are usually designed manually, e.g., augmenting by flipping
an image or replacing a word with synonyms, and weighting by inverse class frequency or loss
values (Freund and Schapire, 1997; Malisiewicz et al., 2011). Recent work has studied automated
approaches, such as learning the composition of augmentation operators with reinforcement learning (Ratner et al., 2017; Cubuk et al., 2019), deriving sample weights adaptively from a validation set
via meta learning (Ren et al., 2018), or learning a weighting network by inducing a curriculum (Jiang
et al., 2018). These learning-based approaches have alleviated the engineering burden and produced
impressive results. However, the algorithms are usually designed specifically for certain types of
manipulation (e.g., either augmentation or weighting) and thus can have limited application scope
in practice.
In this work, we propose a new approach that enables learning for different manipulation schemes
with the same algorithm. Our approach draws inspiration from the recent work (Tan et al., 2019) that
shows equivalence between the data in supervised learning and the reward function in reinforcement
learning. We thus adapt an off-the-shelf reward learning algorithm (Zheng et al., 2018) to the
supervised setting for automated data manipulation. The marriage of the two paradigms results
in a simple yet general algorithm, where various manipulation schemes are reduced to different
parameterization of the data reward. Free parameters of manipulation are learned jointly with the
target model through efficient gradient descent on validation examples. We demonstrate the use of
the approach by instantiating the algorithm to automatically fine-tunes an augmentation network and
learn data weights, respectively.
∗Equal contribution
1
We conduct extensive experiments of text and image classification on various problems of very limited data and imbalanced labels. Both augmentation and weighting by our approach significantly
improve over strong base models, even though the models are initialized with large-scale pretrained
networks such as BERT (Devlin et al., 2019) for text and ResNet (He et al., 2016) for images.
The two manipulation schemes also each outperform a variety of existing rule- and learning-based
augmentation and weighting methods, respectively. Lastly, we observe that the two types of manipulation tend to excel in different contexts: augmentation shows superiority over weighting with a
small amount of data available, while weighting is better at addressing class imbalance problems.
2 Related Work
Rich types of data manipulation have been increasingly used in modern machine learning pipelines.
Previous work each has typically focused on a particular manipulation type. Data augmentation that
perturbs examples without changing the labels is widely used especially in vision (Simard et al.,
1998; Krizhevsky et al., 2012) and speech (Ko et al., 2015; Park et al.) domains. Common heuristicbased methods on images include cropping, mirroring, rotation (Krizhevsky et al., 2012), and so
forth. Recent work has developed automated augmentation approaches (Cubuk et al., 2019; Ratner
et al., 2017; Lemley et al., 2017; Peng et al., 2018; Tran et al., 2017). Xie et al. (2019) additionally
use large-scale unlabeled data. Cubuk et al. (2019); Ratner et al. (2017) use reinforcement learning
to induce the composition of data transformation functions. Instead of treating data augmentation
as a policy, we formulate manipulation as a reward function and use efficient stochastic gradient
descent to learn the manipulation parameters. Text data augmentation has also achieved impressive
success, such as contextual augmentation (Kobayashi, 2018; Wu et al., 2018), back-translation (Sennrich et al., 2016), and manually-specified approaches (Xie et al., 2017; Andreas, 2019). We instantiate our approach for text contextual augmentation as in (Kobayashi, 2018; Wu et al., 2018), but
enhance the previous work by additionally fine-tuning the augmentation network jointly with the
target model.
Data weighting has been used in various algorithms, such as AdaBoost (Freund and Schapire, 1997),
self-paced learning (Kumar et al., 2010), hard-example mining (Shrivastava et al., 2016), and others (Chang et al., 2017; Katharopoulos and Fleuret, 2018). These algorithms largely define sample
weights based on training loss. Recent work (Jiang et al., 2018; Fan et al., 2018) learns a separate
network to predict sample weights. Of particular relevance to our work is (Ren et al., 2018) which
induces sample weights using a validation set. Our instantiated data weighting mechanism has a
key difference in that samples weights are treated as parameters that are iteratively updated, instead
of re-estimated from scratch at each step. We show improved performance of our approach. Besides, our data manipulation approach is derived based on a different perspective of reward learning,
instead of meta-learning as in (Ren et al., 2018). Another type of data manipulation involves data
synthesis, which creates entire artificial samples from scratch. Previous work has used generative
models such as GANs (Baluja and Fischer, 2017; Mirza and Osindero, 2014) and others (Sennrich
et al., 2016). It is interesting to explore the instantiation of our proposed approach for adaptive data
synthesis in the future.
3 Background
We first present the relevant work upon which our automated data manipulation is built. This section
also establishes the notations used throughout the paper.
Let x denote the input and y the output. For example, in text classification, x can be a sentence and
y is the sentence label. Denote the model of interest as pθ(y|x), where θ is the model parameters
to be learned. In supervised setting, given a set of training examples D = {(x
∗
, y∗
)}, we learn the
model by maximizing the data log-likelihood.
Equivalence between Data and Reward The recent work (Tan et al., 2019) introduced an interesting perspective of reformulating maximum likelihood learning as a special instance of a policy
optimization framework. In this perspective, data examples providing training signals are equivalent
to a specialized reward function. Since the original framework (Tan et al., 2019) was derived for
sequence generation problems, here we present a slightly adapted formulation for our context of
data manipulation.
2
To connect the maximum likelihood learning with policy optimization, consider the model pθ(y|x)
as a policy that takes “action” y given the “state” x. Further introduce a reward function R(x, y|D) ∈
R and a variational distribution q(y|x) w.r.t the model pθ(y|x). A variational policy optimization
objective is then written as:
L(q, θ) = Ep(x)Eq(y|x) [R(x, y|D)] − αKL
q(y|x)kpθ(y|x)

+ βH(q), (1)
where p(x) is a prior (uniform) distribution; KL(·k·) is the Kullback–Leibler divergence; H(·) is the
Shannon entropy; and α and β are balancing parameters. Intuitively, the objective maximizes the
expected reward under q and minimizes the distance between q and pθ, regularized by the maximum
entropy of q. The problem is solved with an EM algorithm that optimizes q and θ alternatingly:
E-step: q
0
(y|x) = exp 
α log pθ(y|x) + R(x, y|D)
α + β

/ Z,
M-step: θ
0 = argmaxθ Ep(x)q
0(y|x)

log pθ(y|x)

,
(2)
where Z is the normalization term. With the established framework, it is straightforward to show
that the above optimization procedure is reduced to maximum likelihood learning by taking α →
0, β = 1, and the reward function:
Rδ(x, y|D) = 
1 if (x, y) ∈ D
−∞ otherwise.
(3)
That is, a (x, y) configuration can receive a unit reward only when it matches a training example
in the dataset, while the reward is negative infinite in all other cases. To make the equivalence to
maximum likelihood learning clearer, note that the M-step is now reduced to
θ
0 = argmaxθ Ep(x) exp{Rδ}/Z
log pθ(y|x)

, (4)
where the joint distribution p(x) exp{Rδ}/Z equals the empirical data distribution. Hence the Mstep maximizes the data log-likelihood of the model pθ.
Gradient-based Reward Learning There is a rich line of research on learning the reward in
reinforcement learning. Of particular interest to this work is (Zheng et al., 2018) which learns a
parametric intrinsic reward that additive transforms the original task reward (a.k.a extrinsic reward)
to improve the policy optimization. For consistency of notations with above, formally, let pθ(y|x)
be a policy where y is an action and x is a state. Let Rin
φ
be the intrinsic reward with parameters φ.
In each iteration, the policy parameter θ is updated to maximize the joint rewards, through:
θ
0 = θ + γ∇θL
ex+in(θ, φ), (5)
where L
ex+in is the expectation of the sum of extrinsic and intrinsic rewards; and γ is the step
size. The equation shows θ
0 depends on φ, thus we can write as θ
0 = θ
0
(φ). Next, to optimize
the intrinsic reward parameter φ, since the ultimate performance measure of a policy is the value of
extrinsic reward achieved in the end, a natural objective is then to maximize the expected extrinsic
reward:
φ
0 = φ + γ∇φL
ex(θ
0
(φ)). (6)
Since as above θ
0
is a function of φ, we can directly backpropagate the gradient through θ
0
to φ.
4 Learning Data Manipulation
4.1 Method
Data Manipulation Formulation We now develop our approach of learning data manipulation,
through a novel marriage of the above two distinct methods. Specifically, from the policy optimization perspective, due to the δ-function reward (Eq.3), vanilla maximum likelihood learning is
restricted to use only the exact training examples D in a uniform way. A natural idea of enabling
data manipulation is then to relax the strong restrictions of the δ-function reward and use a new
data-dependent reward Rφ(x, y|D) instead. The new relaxed reward can be parameterized in various ways, resulting in different types of manipulation. For example, Rφ can return varying reward
values when a sample (x, y) matches different data instances in D (instead of constant 1 by Rδ),

Algorithm 1 Joint Learning of Model and Data Manipulation
Input: The target model pθ(y|x)
The data manipulation function Rφ(x, y|D)
Training set D, validation set D
v
1: Initialize model parameter θ and manipulation parameter φ
2: repeat
3: Optimize θ on D enriched with data manipulation
through Eq.(7)
4: Optimize φ by maximizing data log-likelihood on D
v
through Eq.(8)
5: until convergence
Output: Learned model pθ∗ (y|x) and manipulation Rφ∗ (y, x|D)
Train Data ! Val Data !"
ℒ(%, ')
%′(')
Model
%
ℒ(%′('))
' '′
Manipulation
Figure 1: Algorithm Computation.
Blue arrows denote learning model θ.
Red arrows denote learning manipulation φ. Solid arrows denote forward
pass. Dashed arrows denote backward
pass and parameter updates.
yielding a data weighting scheme. Alternatively, Rφ can return a valid reward even when (x, y)
matches a data example only in part, or (x, y) is an entire new sample not in D, which in effect
makes data augmentation and data synthesis, with φ being a data transformer or generator, respectively. In the next section, we demonstrate two particular parameterizations for data augmentation
and weighting, respectively.
The expressive formulation of data manipulation has the advantage that, once we devise a method
of learning the manipulation parameter φ in Rφ, the resulting algorithm can directly be applied to
automate any manipulation type. We present a learning algorithm next.
Learning Manipulation Parameters To learn the parameter φ in the manipulation reward Rφ(x, y|D),
we could in principle adopt any off-the-shelf reward learning algorithm in the literature. In this work,
we draw inspiration from the above gradient-based reward learning (section 3) due to its simplicity
and efficiency. Specifically, the objective of φ is to maximize the ultimate performance measure
of the model pθ(y|x), which, in the context of supervised learning, is the model performance on a
held-out validation set (instead of the training set).
The algorithm optimizes θ and φ alternatingly, corresponding to Eq.(5) and Eq.(6), respectively.
More concretely, in each iteration, we first update the model parameter θ in analogue to Eq.(5)
which optimizes intrinsic reward-enriched objective. Here, we optimize the log-likelihood of the
training set enriched with data manipulation. That is, we replace Rδ with Rφ in Eq.(4), and obtain:
θ
0 = argmaxθ Ep(x) exp{Rφ(x,y|D)}/Z
log pθ(y|x)

. (7)
By noting that the new θ
0 depends on φ, we can write θ
0
as a function of φ, namely, θ
0 = θ
0
(φ).
The practical implementation of the above update depends on the actual parameterization of manipulation Rφ, which we discuss in more detailed in the next section.
The next step is to optimize φ in terms of the ultimate performance measure. In analogue to Eq.(6),
here we aim to maximize the vanilla maximum likelihood objective on the validation set. Formally,
let Dv be the validation set of data examples. The update is then:
φ
0 = argmaxφ Ep(x) exp{Rδ(x,y|Dv)}/Z
log pθ0 (y|x)

= argmaxφ E(x∗,y∗)∼Dv

log pθ0 (y
∗
|x
∗
)

,
(8)
where, since θ
0
is a function of φ, the gradient is backpropagated to φ through θ
0
(φ). Taking
data weighting for example where φ is the training sample weights (more details in section 4.2),
the update is to optimize the weights of training samples so that the model performs best on the
validation set.
The resulting algorithm is summarized in Algorithm 1. Figure 1 illustrates the computation flow.
Learning the manipulation parameter effectively uses a held-out validation set. We show in our
experiments that a very small set of validation examples (e.g., 2 labels per class) is enough to significantly improve the model performance in low data regime.
4
It is worth noting that some previous work has also leveraged validation examples with various algorithms, such as policy gradient for learning data augmentation (Cubuk et al., 2019) and meta learning
for inducing data weights (Ren et al., 2018). Our approach is inspired from a distinct paradigm of
(intrinsic) reward learning. Compared to (Cubuk et al., 2019) that treats data augmentation as a policy, we instead formulate manipulation as a reward function and enable efficient stochastic gradient
updates. Our approach is also more broadly applicable to diverse data manipulation types than (Ren
et al., 2018), as we demonstrate in the next section.
4.2 Instantiations: Augmentation & Weighting
As a case study, we show two parameterizations of Rφ that instantiate distinct data manipulation
schemes. The first example learns augmentation for text data, a domain that has been less studied in
the literature compared to vision and speech (Kobayashi, 2018; Giridhara et al., 2019). The second
instance focuses on automated data weighting, which is applicable to any data domains.
Fine-tuning Text Augmentation
The recent work (Kobayashi, 2018; Wu et al., 2018) has developed a novel contextual augmentation
approach for text data, in which a powerful pretrained language model (LM), such as BERT (Devlin
et al., 2019), is used to generate substitutions of words in a sentence. Specifically, given an original
sentence x
∗
, the method first randomly masks out a few words. The masked sentence is then fed
to BERT which fills the masked positions with new words. To preserve the original sentence class,
the BERT LM is retrofitted as a label-conditional model, and trained to fit to the training examples.
The resulting model is then fixed and used to augment data during the training of target model. We
denote the augmentation distribution as gφ0
(x|x
∗
, y∗
), where φ0 is the fixed BERT LM parameter.
Though having been pretrained on large-scale corpus and fit to the task data, the LM is unaware of
the target model states during augmentation, which can lead to sub-optimal results. Moreover, in
the cases where the task datasets are small, fitting the LM for label-conditional generation can fail
to preserve the labels faithfully, resulting in noisy augmented samples.
It is thus beneficial to additionally fine-tune the LM jointly with the training of target model. This
can be achieved easily by relaxing the strict matching condition of Rδ in Eq.(3), and parameterizing
as:
R
aug
φ
(x, y|D) = 
1 if x ∼ gφ(x|x
∗
, y), (x
∗
, y) ∈ D
−∞ otherwise.
(9)
That is, a sample (x, y) receives a unit reward when y is the true label and x is the augmented
sample by the LM (instead of the exact original data x
∗
). Plugging in the above reward into Eq.(7),
we obtain the data-augmented update for the model θ:
θ
0 = argmaxθ Ex∼gφ(x|x∗,y), (x∗,y)∼D
log pθ(y|x)

. (10)
That is, we pick an example from the training set, and use the LM to create augmented samples,
which are then used to optimize the target model. Since text samples are discrete, to enable efficient
gradient propagation through θ
0
to φ when updating the LM (Eq.8), we use a gumbel-softmax
approximation (Jang et al., 2016) to x when sampling substitution words from the LM.
Learning Data Weights
We now demonstrate the instantiation of data weighting. We aim to assign an importance weight to
each training example to adapt its effect on model training. We automate the process by learning the
data weights. This is achieved by parameterizing Rφ as:
R
w
φ (x, y|D) = 
φi if (x, y) = (x
∗
i
, y∗
i ), (x
∗
i
, y∗
i ) ∈ D
−∞ otherwise,
(11)
where φi ∈ R is the weight associated with the ith example. Plugging Rw
φ
into Eq.(7), we obtain the
weighted update for the model θ:
θ
0 = argmaxθ E(x∗
i
,y∗
i
)∈D, i∼softmax(φi)

log pθ(y|x)

. (12)
In practice, when minibatch stochastic optimization is used, we approximate the weighted sampling
by taking the softmax over the weights of only the minibatch examples. The data weights φ are
5
updated with Eq.(8) as above. It is worth noting that the previous work (Ren et al., 2018) similarly
derives data weights based on their gradient directions on a validation set. Our algorithm differs
in that the data weights are parameters maintained and updated throughout the training, instead of
re-estimated from scratch in each iteration. Experiments show the parametric treatment achieves
superior performance in various settings. There are alternative parameterizations other than Eq.(11).
For example, replacing φi
in Eq.(11) with log φi cancels the softmax normalization in Eq.(12) as is
used in (Ren et al., 2018).
5 Experiments
We conduct extensive experiments to empirically verify our data manipulation approach, including
the above data weighting and text data augmentation. We study on text and image classification,
and two difficult settings of low data regime and imbalanced labels. Code and data used in the
experiments are included in the supplementary materials, and will be published upon acceptance.
5.1 Experimental Setup
Base Models. We choose strong pretrained networks as our base models for both text and image
classification. Specifically, on text data, we use the BERT (base, uncased) model (Devlin et al.,
2019); while on image data, we use ResNet-34 (He et al., 2016) pretrained on ImageNet. We show
that, even with the large-scale pretraining, data manipulation can still be very helpful to boost the
model performance on end tasks.
Since our approach uses validation sets for manipulation parameter learning, for a fair comparison
with the base model, we train the base model in two ways. The first is to train the model on the
training sets as usual and select the best step using the validation sets; the second is to train on the
merged training and validation sets for a fixed number of steps, which is set to the average number
of steps selected in the first method. We report the results of both methods.
Comparison Methods. We compare our approach with a variety of previous methods that were
designed for specific manipulation schemes: (1) For text data augmentation, we compare with the
latest model-based augmentation (Wu et al., 2018) which uses a fixed conditional BERT language
model for word substitution (section 4.2). As with base models, we also tried fitting the augmentatin
model to both the training data and the joint training-validation data, and did not observe significant
difference. Following (Wu et al., 2018), we also study a conventional approach that replaces words
with their synonyms using WordNet (Miller, 1995). (2) For data weighting, we compare with the
state-of-the-art approach (Ren et al., 2018) that dynamically re-estimates sample weights in each
iteration based on the validation set gradient directions. We follow (Ren et al., 2018) and also
evaluate the commonly-used proportion method that weights by inverse class frequency.
Training. For both the BERT classifier model and the BERT LM augmentation model, we use
Adam optimization with an initial learning rate of 4e-5. For ResNets, we use SGD optimization
with a learning rate of 1e-3. For text data augmentation, we augment each minibatch by generating
two samples for each data points (each with 1, 2 or 3 substitutions), and use both the samples and the
original data to train the model. For data weighting, to avoid exploding value, we update the weight
of each data point in a minibatch by decaying the previous weight value with a factor of 0.1 and
then adding the gradient. All experiments were implemented with PyTorch (pytorch.org) and were
performed on a Linux machine with 4 GTX 1080Ti GPUs and 64GB RAM. All reported results are
averaged over 15 runs ± one standard deviation.
5.2 Low Data Regime
We study the problem where only very few labeled examples are available. Both of our augmentation
and weighting boost base model performance, and are superior to respective comparison methods.
We also observe that augmentation performs better than weighting in the low-data setting.
Setup For text classification, we use the popular benchmark datasets, including SST-5 for 5-class
sentence sentiment (Socher et al., 2013), IMDB for binary movie review sentiment (Maas et al.,
2011), and TREC for 6-class question types (Li and Roth, 2002). We subsample a small training set
on each task by randomly picking 40 instances for each class. We further create small validation sets,
6
Model SST-5 (40+2) IMDB (40+5) TREC (40+5)
Base model: BERT (Devlin et al., 2019) 33.32 ± 4.04 63.55 ± 5.35 88.25 ± 2.81
Base model + val-data 35.76 ± 3.03 62.65 ± 3.32 88.42 ± 4.90
Augment
synonym 32.45 ± 4.59 62.68 ± 3.94 88.26 ± 2.76
fixed augmentation (Wu et al., 2018) 34.84 ± 2.76 63.65 ± 3.21 88.28 ± 4.50
Ours: fine-tuned augmentation 37.03 ± 2.05 65.62 ± 3.32 89.15 ± 2.41
Weight Ren et al. (2018) 36.09 ± 2.26 63.01 ± 3.33 88.60 ± 2.85
Ours 36.51 ± 2.54 64.78 ± 2.72 89.01 ± 2.39
Table 1: Accuracy of Data Manipulation on Text Classification. All results are averaged over 15 runs
± one standard deviation. The numbers in parentheses next to the dataset names indicates the size
of the selected subsets. For example, (40+2) denotes 40 training instances and 2 validation instances
per class. Since every class has the same number of examples, the proportion-based weighting is
degenerated to the base model training and thus omitted here.
 Although visually striking and slickly s
s staged, it’s also cold, grey, antiseptic a
a and emotionally desiccated.
negative
stunning
bland
fantastic
dazzling
lively
sharp
charming
heroism
demanding
revealing
taboo
dark
negative
misleading
messy
bitter
goofy
slow
trivial
dry

	 
	 
	 
	





	
Figure 2: Words predicted with the highest probabilities by the augmentation LM.
Two tokens “striking” and “grey” are
masked for substitution. The boxes in respective colors list the predicted words after training epoch 1 and 3, respectively.
E.g., “stunning” is the most probable substitution for “striking” in epoch 1.
Model Pretrained Not-Pretrained
Base model: ResNet-34 37.69 ± 3.03 22.98 ± 2.81
Base model + val-data 38.09 ± 1.87 23.42 ± 1.47
Ren et al. (2018) 38.02 ± 2.14 23.44 ± 1.63
Ours 38.95 ± 2.03 24.92 ± 1.57
Table 2: Accuracy of Data Weighting on Image Classification. The small subset of CIFAR10 used here
has 40 training instances and 2 validation instances for
each class. The “pretrained” column is the results by
initializing the ResNet-34 (He et al., 2016) base model
with ImageNet-pretrained weights. In contrast, “NotPretrained” denotes the base model is randomly initialized. As in text classification, the proportion-based
weighting is omitted as it is degenerated to the base
model training.
i.e., 2 instances per class for SST-5, and 5 instances per class for IMDB and TREC, respectively. The
reason we use slightly more validation examples on IMDB and TREC is that the model can easily
achieve 100% validation accuracy if the validation sets are too small. Thus, the SST-5 task has 210
labeled examples in total, while IMDB has 90 labels and TREC has 270. Such extremely small
datasets pose significant challenges for learning deep neural networks. For image classification,
we similarly create a small subset of the CIFAR10 data, which includes 40 instances per class for
training, and 2 instances per class for validation.
Results Table 1 shows the data results on text classification. For data augmentation, our approach
that fine-tunes the augmentation network jointly with model training significantly improves over
the base model on all the three datasets. Besides, compared to both the conventional synonym
substitution and the approach that keeps the augmentation network fixed, our adaptive augmentation
achieves superior results. Indeed, the heuristic-based synonym approach can sometimes harm the
model performance (e.g., SST-5 and IMDB), as also observed in previous work (Wu et al., 2018;
Kobayashi, 2018). This can be because the heuristic rules do not fit the task or datasets well. In
contrast, learning-based augmentation has the advantage of adaptively generating useful samples to
improve model training.
Table 1 also shows the data weighting results. Our weight learning consistently improves over the
base model and the latest weighting method. In particular, instead of re-estimating sample weights
from scratch in each iteration (Ren et al., 2018), our approach treats the weights as manipulation
parameters maintained throughout the training. We speculate that the parametric treatment can adapt
weights more smoothly and provide historical information, which can be beneficial in the small-data
context.
7
Model 20 : 1000 50 : 1000 100 : 1000
Base model: BERT (Devlin et al., 2019) 54.91 ± 5.98 67.73 ± 9.20 75.04 ± 4.51
Base model + val-data 52.58 ± 4.58 55.90 ± 4.18 68.21 ± 5.28
proportion 57.42 ± 7.91 71.14 ± 6.71 76.14 ± 5.8
Ren et al. (2018) 74.61 ± 3.54 76.89 ± 5.07 80.73 ± 2.19
Ours 75.08 ± 4.98 79.35 ± 2.59 81.82 ± 1.88
Table 3: Accuracy of Data Weighting on Imbalanced SST-2. The first row shows the number of
training examples in each of the two classes.
Model 20 : 1000 50 : 1000 100 : 1000
Base model: ResNet (He et al., 2016) 72.20 ± 4.70 81.65 ± 2.93 86.42 ± 3.15
Base model + val-data 64.66 ± 4.81 69.51 ± 2.90 79.38 ± 2.92
proportion 72.29 ± 5.67 81.49 ± 3.83 84.26 ± 4.58
Ren et al. (2018) 74.35 ± 6.37 82.25 ± 2.08 86.54 ± 2.69
Ours 75.32 ± 6.36 83.11 ± 2.08 86.99 ± 3.47
Table 4: Accuracy of Data Weighting on Imbalanced CIFAR10. The first row shows the number of
training examples in each of the two classes.
It is interesting to see from Table 1 that our augmentation method consistently outperforms the
weighting method, showing that data augmentation can be a more suitable technique than data
weighting for manipulating small-size data. Our approach provides the generality for parameterization and instantiation of diverse manipulation types.
To investigate the augmentation language model and its fine-tuning, we show in Figure 2 the top-5
most probable word substitutions predicted by the augmentation model for the two masked tokens,
respectively. Comparing the results of epoch 1 and epoch 3, we can see the augmentation model
evolves and dynamically adjusts the augmentation behavior as the training proceeds. Through finetuning, the model seems to make substitutions that are more coherent with the conditioning label
and the original words (e.g., replacing the word “striking” with “bland” in epoch 1 v.s. “charming”
in epoch 3).
Table 2 shows the data weighting results on image classification. We evaluate two settings with the
ResNet-34 base model being initialized randomly or with pretrained weights. Our data weighting
consistently improves over the base model and (Ren et al., 2018) regardless of the initialization.
5.3 Imbalanced Labels
We next study a different problem setting where the training data of different classes are imbalanced.
We show the data weighting approach greatly improves the classification performance. It is also
observed that, different from the low-data setting, the LM data augmentation approach does not
perform well on the class-imbalance problems.
Setup We study on binary classification tasks. For text classification, we use the SST-2 sentiment
analysis benchmark (Socher et al., 2013); while for image, we select class 1 and 2 from CIFAR10
for binary classification. We use the same processing on both datasets to build the class-imbalance
setting. Specifically, we randomly select 1,000 training instances of class 2, and vary the number of
class-1 instances in {20, 50, 100}. For each dataset, we use 10 validation examples in each class.
Trained models are evaluated on the full test set of the respective classes.
Results Table 3 shows the classification results on SST-2 with varying imbalance ratios. We can
see our data weighting performs best across all settings. In particular, the improvement over the
base model increases as the data gets more imbalanced, ranging from around 6 accuracy points on
100:1000 to over 20 accuracy points on 20:1000. Our method is again consistently better than (Ren
et al., 2018), validating that the parametric treatment is beneficial. The proportion-based data
weighting provides only limited improvement, showing the advantage of adaptive data weighting.
The base model trained on the joint training-validation data for fixed steps fails to perform well, due
8
to the lack of a held-out set for selecting steps. Our approach make a better use of the validation set
for both manipulation learning and target model selection.
Table 4 shows the results on imbalanced CIFAR10 classification. Similarly, our method outperforms
other comparison approaches. In contrast, the fixed proportion-based method sometimes harms the
performance as in the 50:1000 and 100:1000 settings.
We also tested the text augmentation LM on the SST-2 imbalanced data. Interestingly, the augmentation tends to hinder model training and yields accuracy of around 50% (random guess). This is
because the augmentation LM is first fit to the imbalanced data, which makes label preservation
inaccurate and introduces lots of noise during augmentation. Though a more carefully designed
augmentation mechanism can potentially help with imbalanced classification (e.g., augmenting only
the rare classes), the above observation further shows that the varying data manipulation schemes
could have different applicable scopes. Our approach is thus favorable as the single algorithm can
be instantiated to learn different schemes.
6 Conclusions
We have developed a new method of learning different data manipulation schemes with the same algorithm. Our approach adapts an off-the-shelf reward learning algorithm for joint manipulation and
target model training. Different manipulation schemes are reduced to just different parameterization
of the data reward function. We instantiate the algorithm for text data augmentation and sample
weighting, and show significantly improved performance over strong base models and previous manipulation methods. We are excited to instantiate and explore more types of manipulations, and in
particular study the combination of different manipulation schemes.